OBSDOCS-978: Document how user-workload monitoring admins can write g… (#84810)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/monitoring-creating-cross-project-alerting-rules-for-user-defined-projects.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="creating-cross-project-alerting-rules-for-user-defined-projects_{context}"]
= Creating cross-project alerting rules for user-defined projects

> You can create alerting rules for user-defined projects that are not bound to their project of origin by configuring a project in the `user-workload-monitoring-config` config map. This allows for generic alerting rules that get applied to all, or a subset of, the user-defined projects instead of having individual `PrometheusRule` objects in each user project.

Reviewer: > Does that mean that such alerting rules can be also applied to default namespaces, not only user-created ones?

correct but the primary focus is user-defined projects so I'm not sure we should document this level of details.

> You can create alerting rules for user-defined projects that are not bound to their project of origin by configuring a project in the `user-workload-monitoring-config` config map. This allows for generic alerting rules that get applied to all, or a subset of, the user-defined projects instead of having individual `PrometheusRule` objects in each user project.

Reviewer: > I suppose we define to which namespaces the rule will apply when defining the PromQL query expression?

correct too.

.Prerequisites

ifndef::openshift-dedicated,openshift-rosa[]

> * You have access to the cluster as a user with the `cluster-admin` cluster role.

Author: @simonpasquier Would you aggree with this prerequisite? Because of the first step, this cannot be simply done by a person with `monitoring-rules-edit` cluster role.  But then the steps to actually create the rules could be done with `monitoring-rules-edit` rights. So I am not sure how to deal with this. Separating this to two procedures seems like an overkill to me :sweat_smile:

Reviewer: In practice you need
* edit permissions on the configmap to configure the list of namespaces
* binding to the monitoring-rules-edit role for the namespaces.
I agree that 2 procedures would be too verbose but detailing which permissions are actually required makes sense to me.

* A cluster administrator has enabled monitoring for user-defined projects.
endif::openshift-dedicated,openshift-rosa[]
ifdef::openshift-dedicated,openshift-rosa[]
* You have access to the cluster as a user with the `dedicated-admin` role.
* The `user-workload-monitoring-config` `ConfigMap` object exists. This object is created by default when the cluster is created.
endif::openshift-dedicated,openshift-rosa[]
* You have installed the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).

.Procedure

. Edit the `user-workload-monitoring-config` config map in the `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` project:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n openshift-user-workload-monitoring edit configmap user-workload-monitoring-config
----

> . Configure projects in which you want to create alerting rules that are not bound to the project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Configure projects in which you want to create alerting rules that are not bound to a specific project:
```

    # ...
----
<1> Specify one or more projects in which you want to create cross-project alerting rules. Prometheus and Thanos Ruler for user-defined monitoring do not enforce the project label in `PrometheusRule` objects created in these projects.

. Create a YAML file for alerting rules. In this example, it is called `example-cross-project-alerting-rule.yaml`.

. Add an alerting rule configuration to the YAML file.
The following example creates a new cross-project alerting rule called `example-security`. The alerting rule fires when a user project does not enforce the restricted pod security policy:
+
.Example cross-project alerting rule
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: PrometheusRule
metadata:
  name: example-security
namespace: ns1 #<1>
spec:
  groups:
    - name: pod-security-policy
      rules:
        - alert: "ProjectNotEnforcingRestrictedPolicy" # <2>
          for: 5m # <3>
          expr: kube_namespace_labels{namespace!~"(openshift|kube).*|default",label_pod_security_kubernetes_io_enforce!="restricted"} # <4>
          annotations:
            summary: "Restricted policy not enforced"

>             description: "Project{{ $labels.namespace }} does not enforce the restricted pod security policy." #<5>

Reviewer: description would be equivalent to summary. Internally we recommend/require the former. Not sure why the other examples use "message" instead. Let's stick with "message" and address this small glitch in a follow-up?

>             description: "Project{{ $labels.namespace }} does not enforce the restricted pod security policy." #<5>

Author: Sounds good!

** The `user-workload-monitoring-config-edit` role in the `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` project to edit the `user-workload-monitoring-config` config map.
** The `monitoring-rules-edit` cluster role for the project where you want to create an alerting rule.
* A cluster administrator has enabled monitoring for user-defined projects.
endif::openshift-dedicated,openshift-rosa[]
ifdef::openshift-dedicated,openshift-rosa[]
* You have access to the cluster as a user with the `dedicated-admin` role.
+
[NOTE]
====
If you are a non-administrator user, you can still create cross-project alerting rules if you have the `monitoring-rules-edit` cluster role for the project where you want to create an alerting rule. However, that project needs to be configured in the `user-workload-monitoring-config` config map under the `namespacesWithoutLabelEnforcement` property, which can be done only by cluster administrators.
====
* The `user-workload-monitoring-config` `ConfigMap` object exists. This object is created by default when the cluster is created.
endif::openshift-dedicated,openshift-rosa[]
* You have installed the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).

.Procedure

> . Edit the `user-workload-monitoring-config` config map in the `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` project:

Author: Thank you for the information. Because the monitoring docs use the same strusture that I used here (you can see all the procedures in, for example, [this section](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.html#configuring-the-monitoring-stack_configuring-the-monitoring-stack)) I think I will keep it as it is now for consistency. Thank you!

----

. Configure projects in which you want to create alerting rules that are not bound to a specific project:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: user-workload-monitoring-config
  namespace: openshift-user-workload-monitoring
data:
  config.yaml: |
    namespacesWithoutLabelEnforcement: [ <namespace> ] # <1>
    # ...
----
<1> Specify one or more projects in which you want to create cross-project alerting rules. Prometheus and Thanos Ruler for user-defined monitoring do not enforce the `namespace` label in `PrometheusRule` objects created in these projects.

. Create a YAML file for alerting rules. In this example, it is called `example-cross-project-alerting-rule.yaml`.

. Add an alerting rule configuration to the YAML file.
The following example creates a new cross-project alerting rule called `example-security`. The alerting rule fires when a user project does not enforce the restricted pod security policy:
+
.Example cross-project alerting rule
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: PrometheusRule
metadata:
  name: example-security

> namespace: ns1 #<1>

Author: Hello, thank you for the question! Because that yaml is an example, example cannot contain variable, but real values, so it needs to stay as it is.

spec:
  groups:
    - name: pod-security-policy
      rules:
        - alert: "ProjectNotEnforcingRestrictedPolicy" # <2>
          for: 5m # <3>
          expr: kube_namespace_labels{namespace!~"(openshift|kube).*|default",label_pod_security_kubernetes_io_enforce!="restricted"} # <4>
          annotations:
            message: "Restricted policy not enforced. Project {{ $labels.namespace }} does not enforce the restricted pod security policy." #<5>
          labels:
            severity: warning # <6>
----
<1> Ensure that you specify the project that you defined in the `namespacesWithoutLabelEnforcement` field.
<2> The name of the alerting rule you want to create.
<3> The duration for which the condition should be true before an alert is fired.
<4> The PromQL query expression that defines the new rule.
<5> The message associated with the alert.
<6> The severity that alerting rule assigns to the alert.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
Ensure that you create a specific cross-project alerting rule in only one of the projects that you specified in the `namespacesWithoutLabelEnforcement` field.
If you create the same cross-project alerting rule in multiple projects, it results in repeated alerts.

> ====

Reviewer 2: LGTM to me
